Add ECMA definition of symmetry operation regexp and associated tests (#488)
Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE: optimade.rst

-------------------------------------------------

Symmetry operation strings that comprise the :property:`space_group_symmetry_operation_xyz` property MUST conform to the following regular expressions.

> The regular expressions are recorded below in two forms:

Author: ```suggestion
The regular expressions are recorded below in two forms, both compatible with the `OPTIMADE Regular Expression Format`.
```

> The regular expressions are recorded below in two forms, both compatible with the `OPTIMADE Regular Expression Format`.

Reviewer: The PCRE version is currently not compatible with the `OPTIMADE Regular Expression Format` since it uses the `{2}` operator:
```
($symop_re)(,$symop_re){2}
```

Author: Hmm, yes... do we care about this enough to expand the PCRE regexp too or should I just reword the above to say the second example is compatible? @rartino had thoughts I think...

Reviewer 2: Doesn't the declarations in the PCRE version (e.g. "$translations = '1\/2|[12]\/3|[1-3]\/4|[1-5]\/6';") already disqualify it? I think the point here is that the PCRE one is meant to be written as human-readable as possible, and the ECMA version is meant to be what we can put in the `pattern` field?

Reviewer: Looks good, but could we replace "using declarations" with "using variable interpolation"?

Author: Updated above to just using "variables" as that's probably clear enough and more generic. Will commit

- Perl Compatible Regular Expression (PCRE) syntax, with `Perl extensions <https://perldoc.perl.org/perlre>`__ used for readability and expressivity.
  The :val:`symop_definitions` section defines several variables in Perl syntax that capture common parts of the regular expressions (REs) and need to be interpolated into the final REs used for matching.
  The :val:`symops` section contains the REs themselves.

>   The whitespace characters in these definitions are not significant; if used in Perl programs, these expressions MUST be processed with the :code:`/x` RE option.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The whitespace characters in these definitions are not significant; if used in Perl programs, these expressions MUST be processed with the :code:`/x` RE modifier.
```
The proper term for this is "modifier", see https://perldoc.perl.org/perlre#Modifiers

  A working example of these REs in action can be found in the :code:`tests/cases/pcre_symops_001.sh` and other test cases.

  .. code:: PCRE

     #BEGIN PCRE symop_definitions

     $translations = '1\/2|[12]\/3|[1-3]\/4|[1-5]\/6';

     $symop_translation_appended = "[-+]? [xyz] ([-+][xyz])? ([-+] ($translations) )?";
     $symop_translation_prepended = "[-+]? ($translations) ([-+] [xyz] ([-+][xyz])? )?";

     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

     #END PCRE symop_definitions

  .. code:: PCRE

     #BEGIN PCRE symops

     ^ # From the beginning of the string...
     ($symop_re)(,$symop_re){2}
     $ # ... match to the very end of the string

     #END PCRE symops

> - The regular expression is also provided in a simplified explicit form compatible with the subset of the `ECMA 262 dialect <https://ecma-international.org/publications-and-standards/standards/ecma-262/>`_ syntax supported by `JSON Schema field "pattern" <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation#name-pattern>_`:

Reviewer 2: I propose to first merge #490 and then rewrite this sentence to refer to that appendix.

Reviewer 4: I agree that we should proceed with merging and wording issues should not block it. The proposed consistency tests can be added later.

It just hurts me a bit to say "provided in a simplified ... for" when in fact it is more complicated :/ (but of course it depends on how one defines simplicity ;) ). I suggest remove the word "simplified", yielding " The regular expression is also provided in a explicit form compatible with the subset of the `ECMA ..." (and further according to the text), and merge.

Author: Happy to change wording as you see fit, please just make a suggestion!

Re: the tests, they already exist and are passing (see https://github.com/Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE/pull/488/files#r1450464273)

> - The regular expression is also provided in a simplified explicit form compatible with the subset of the `ECMA 262 dialect <https://ecma-international.org/publications-and-standards/standards/ecma-262/>`_ syntax supported by `JSON Schema field "pattern" <https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation#name-pattern>_`:

Author: ```suggestion
- The regular expression is also provided in an expanded form:
```

  .. code:: ECMA

     #BEGIN ECMA symops

     ^([-+]?[xyz]([-+][xyz])?([-+](1/2|[12]/3|[1-3]/4|[1-5]/6))?|[-+]?(1/2|[12]/3|[1-3]/4|[1-5]/6)([-+][xyz]([-+][xyz])?)?),([-+]?[xyz]([-+][xyz])?([-+](1/2|[12]/3|[1-3]/4|[1-5]/6))?|[-+]?(1/2|[12]/3|[1-3]/4|[1-5]/6)([-+][xyz]([-+][xyz])?)?),([-+]?[xyz]([-+][xyz])?([-+](1/2|[12]/3|[1-3]/4|[1-5]/6))?|[-+]?(1/2|[12]/3|[1-3]/4|[1-5]/6)([-+][xyz]([-+][xyz])?)?)$

> 

Reviewer 4: What if we add a test that: a) takes the original PCRE definitions b) outputs the expanded PCRE (I guess it uses only ECMA-endorsed subset of the REs) and c) compares that with the ECMA RE provided in the OPTIMADE spec? In this way we would be *sure* that if tests pass, the two versions of the REs define the same thing.

Author: See https://github.com/Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE/pull/488/files#r1450464273; pretty much does what you want, beyond generating the regexp directly

Reviewer: I think this PR (https://github.com/ml-evs/OPTIMADE/pull/1) should address Saulius' suggestion.

Reviewer 2: This is now merged into this PR.

The Symmetry Operation String Regular Expressions
-------------------------------------------------

> Symmetry operation strings that comprise the :property:`space\_group\_symmetry\_operation\_xyz` property MUST conform to the following regular expressions.

Author: ```suggestion
Symmetry operation strings that comprise the :property:`space\_group\_symmetry\_operations\_xyz` property MUST conform to the following regular expressions.
```

  The :val:`symop_definitions` section defines several variables in Perl syntax that capture common parts of the regular expressions (REs) and need to be interpolated into the final REs used for matching.
  The :val:`symops` section contains the REs themselves.
  The whitespace characters in these definitions are not significant; if used in Perl programs, these expressions MUST be processed with the :code:`/x` RE modifier.
  A working example of these REs in action can be found in the :code:`tests/cases/pcre_symops_001.sh` and other test cases.

  .. code:: PCRE

     #BEGIN PCRE symop_definitions

     $translations = '1\/2|[12]\/3|[1-3]\/4|[1-5]\/6';

     $symop_translation_appended = "[-+]? [xyz] ([-+][xyz])? ([-+] ($translations) )?";
     $symop_translation_prepended = "[-+]? ($translations) ([-+] [xyz] ([-+][xyz])? )?";

     $symop_re = "($symop_translation_appended|$symop_translation_prepended)";

     #END PCRE symop_definitions

  .. code:: PCRE

     #BEGIN PCRE symops

     ^ # From the beginning of the string...
     ($symop_re)(,$symop_re){2}
     $ # ... match to the very end of the string

     #END PCRE symops

> - The regular expression is also provided in an expanded form:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The regular expression is also provided in an expanded form as an OPTIMADE regex:
```
